and welcome back to a fresh episode of
business Grow Show I'm your host Sam
Dunning co-owner over at webchoiceuk.com
and if you haven't yet check out our
weekly emails where we share actionable
B2B website and marketing tips useful
guides podcasts and more you can give it
a shot over at business growth dot
emails so today we've got a special
episode I am joined by Tim solu Tim is
the CMO over at ah refs Tim welcome to
the show sir how are we doing hey Sam
thanks a lot for having me
no problem at all man looking forward to
diving in because today we're going to
be sharing the juicy secrets of how
ahrefs has bootstrapped to a hundred
million plus since they uh originally
founded around 2010
um so really excited to dive in because
I know you've been with the company
about seven years or so Tim and kind of
learned some of the ins and outs of
exactly what you brought on some of the
strategies you brought into play to the
business to see the exponential growth
that it's seen since then
um so first and foremost I guess a bit
of a tough one Tim because I don't like
a like to beat around the bush too much
but how come ahrefs has avoided
investment like why did they decide to
stay bootstrapped
uh so this would be a good question to
our founder uh not myself because I
wasn't the one making those decisions
but uh as far as I know and from all the
conversations that we had with him over
the years yeah uh first of all he had
some smaller successful businesses
before insurance so right he was able to
fund uh ahrefs with some of his own
money
uh and then as if I'm not mistaken HF
was profitable uh after a year of
development
so once they released the first version
and people started signing up uh the
project was profitable and uh
yeah Dmitry just didn't see
why he would need what he would need the
investment for and he didn't want to
give up control of the company and I
guess he didn't have any goals or
aspirations to sell the company
uh so I guess that's how that's how it
came to be uh and eventually yeah we
were approached by lots of different uh
VC funds yeah who expressed interest in
uh investing uh in HS but that happened
at a stage well Dmitry first of all he'd
never proactively reached out to any
investors in the early days of the
company uh when most Founders do it
because they don't have any funds of
their own uh to
to scale their company to to take it off
the ground yeah but with Dimitri he
didn't do it he took the company off the
ground himself and once when ahrefs was
getting momentum
VC started reaching out to us
but at this point the margins of the
business were big enough that Dmitry had
enough money to reinvest in business
every month to the point that he didn't
understand if someone would throw
another I know 10 or 20 million into the
company what it would change so
when hr's got traction we didn't have a
money problem we had like hiring
problems we had engineering problems but
we didn't have problems with money so uh
I guess
it was never a big challenge for Dmitry
to to have funds so he never was looking
for founding for funding and he enjoys
being
the only kind of decision maker without
any other stakeholders that would push
him to do things that he doesn't want to
do and they think this is also a very
important part of it he wants to make
decisions that he think he thinks are
best not some decisions which would make
a bunch of VCS are richer
and fair play to him I mean he's like
you say he's kept the company extremely
lean with under 100 employees working
directly on on the ahrefs and extremely
profitable at the same time it works out
to over clear of 1 million uh Revenue
per employee um on the company which is
yeah amazing stats so with that said Tim
you came on board and the business was
it around 2015 2016.
gotcha so what Revenue was the company
at when you first joined
I don't remember exactly I think it was
in the ballpark of 10 million it it
might have been a little under 10
million or a little over but that was
the ballpark got it and since then now
we're at almost 10 fold of that I think
of 100 million plus yeah yeah over 10
fold basically awesome so what were when
you came on board a cmo2 what were some
of the first steps
that you put into play when you join the
organization
uh well I stayed an only marketing
person uh in the company for quite a
while
for a year maybe maybe even for two
years I didn't need to hire anyone
because I myself was learning what is
going on with the industry what is going
on with the company trying to better
understand
what kind of
product people in our Market need
because if you think of the word
marketing lots of people think of
marketing as promotion
but the root of the word marketing is
Market you need to study the market what
it wants and create the product that
market would pay money for so it's a
very uh there's a very famous case in
marketing where Coca-Cola tried to make
a drink that was sweeter than Pepsi
so basically they created a new product
but that was marketing so creating a
product is a large part of marketing and
I was uh in the first few years I was
investing a lot of my efforts and
attention to better understand
how people are using our product and
what we can improve in our product
to make more people use it and how we
can
uh educate the market about the
awesomeness of our product
so these were the things that I was
figuring out uh in the first couple
years
got it so how people actually use the
tool and how you could educate them
any
any I guess ways that worked super well
for you Tim when it came to doing that
when it came to learning the market
uh so talking to customers uh as boring
as it sounds but I did quite a bit of it
and uh many people think that they talk
to customers but they actually don't
unless you jump on a Skype call with
someone who is looking to use your
software and start start answering a
question by question you you don't get a
good understanding of your target
audience the language they speak what
they do understand about your product
what they don't understand about your
product so for me I had a few epiphanies
when I was talking to uh newbie people
who were new to SEO but they still
wanted to pay for our product because
they wanted to improve traffic to their
websites
and I just realized
what lack of knowledge of SEO they have
right they were already ready to pay
money for a premium SEO tool without
good understanding of SEO
so that helped me to realize that we
need to provide more educational
materials and we need to show people how
to use ahrefs to achieve different SEO
goals uh that's that's what uh kind of
predetermined our blogging strategy
that's what predetermined our video
strategy and overall educational content
became
like one of the pillars of a traps one
of the pillars is the product itself
another pillar is educational content
that we produce
got it
so that initial phase you took two years
or so to to really understand the market
understand how people were using their
tool and then that showed you that you
needed to educate the market further and
what what ahrefs can do the value can
provide but at the same time actually be
a useful resource it sounds like to your
prospects to your potential customers
um and then it was that will unleash the
right now of course you've got hundred
thousand followers across different
social channels across your YouTube
across other different channels as well
so what were some of the what are some
of the key takings like how did you
dissect that information and say look
based on these learnings based on this
customer research I think we need to do
x y z
and then in turn that's kind of share
with leadership that you think that's
going to bring these results to the
table
so are a lot of the decisions if not all
of the decisions that well okay let's
use the word most of the decisions we
make at hrefs are not very scientific
okay we usually follow things called
logic and Common Sense
so whenever we see for example uh people
in our industry discussing something on
Reddit
uh some use case or some challenge that
they're trying to solve and we see a way
how we can make this easier for them
with the help of our product if we
develop a certain feature we just go and
develop it because the fact that people
for example on Reddit are discussing
how to solve a certain problem in
certain ways and we have a better
solution it's already kind of a proof of
concept for us
but we also rely on intuition a lot so
it's one thing to get feedback from
different channels from uh from
following some of the thought leaders in
the space from seeing how your customers
do their jobs from seeing what your
competitors are doing uh
Etc
but it's another thing to use your
intuition and pair that with uh
development decisions with marketing
decisions because for every feature
there's a cost to develop it there's
opportunity cost of working on any other
feature that you have in your roadmap uh
and there's also
some strategy of how you're going to
advertise this feature and explain it to
people so how easy it is uh how easy
this feature is to understand to people
how to reach people uh with this
functionality so there's a lot of things
that you have to consider if you want to
make an effective decision
and what we realized is that the more
you try to
codify making decisions the more you try
to bring structure to it for example
have a enormous uh Google spreadsheet
with lots of columns for like making
scores okay this feature has business
score of that development score of that
marketing score of that blah blah blah
blah blah so the more you try to analyze
it like this the more you get into
analysis paralysis and you just fail to
wrap your hand for example if you have
20 features in your roadmap and for
every feature you come up with I know
five metrics that you want to analyze uh
it's just incomprehensible so we rely on
our intuition we feel that certain
feature makes more sense from all those
perspectives than others and this is how
we make decisions so the process is not
scientific it's more about and it's more
about experience as well because if you
you release a few features and they fail
and then you release a few other
features and they are received and they
received very well by the market you
start to develop this intuition what the
market wants what the market needs and
eventually you start making better and
better decisions because if you spend
all your time analyzing what you can
release instead of releasing stuff uh
you would be moving very very slow and
this is something I actually today I was
listening a cool interview of Mr Beast
and Lex Friedman and they were actually
discussing how Elon took over Twitter
and they enjoyed how Mr Beast pointed
out that since Elon took over Twitter
started releasing all sorts of things
some good things some bad things but
they're trying they're moving fast but
if you look at Facebook it takes them
ages to implement some new features so
basically we like the the kind of Elon
Musk mindset where we just release more
stuff instead instead of over analyzing
or instead of getting deep in
bureaucracy got it got it so moving fast
but it sounds like at the same time you
were taking insights that made sense
like you were looking at Reddit threads
and seeing what people were talking
about and looking for Snippets of what
you could then maybe problems you could
fix or think points you could address in
the actual tools and the and the
features you're releasing
yeah
cool man so with that said let's talk
about some of the the main channels we
touched on them then but in terms of
this educational content and in terms of
moving forward once you've done your
initial kind of market research and
understanding customers like what were
some of the the key channels that you
knew you'd you needed to put into play
to bring on this growth because now AHS
has got thousands of thousands of users
signing up each and every week so what
were some of the channels that really
saw growth and at the same time I guess
this is a two-part question like
how did was it was it a similar process
in terms of how you release features
like did you just put things out and see
what stuck see what hell was this quite
carefully researched I.E we know you
need to do this channel this channel
this channel
um
this is a rather complex question
the way I see it is that hrefs only has
uh
two growth channels or two customer
acquisition channels
these are SEO and Word of Mouth
and the thing is those things are
connected uh and they're connected with
the with the term called content both
for for SEO you need to create content
which will then show up in search
engines
and for word of mouth if you want people
to talk about you
you need to First educate them and make
them successful so that they would talk
about their success to other people or
you need to put some talking points uh
in their heads about like what makes
your product better or about the use
cases of your product or about the
problems it helps you solve
so by creating content that helps our
potential customers to be successful
and educates them on the awesomeness of
our product we're kind of killing two
birds with one stone on one hand we are
creating lots of content that can rank
in Google and bring us consistent search
traffic month over month over month on
the second hand as people read this
content and get knowledge which is
useful which is effective which has
utility they naturally go and share this
content with others for example uh let's
say I'm the head of marketing at some
company I've read an article at hrefs
about how to perform a certain SEO task
and then they go and teach my team what
they need to do then one of my team
members move on moves on and goes to
another company where they become a team
lead but they know the process that
worked that initially comes from an
article at HS so this is how content
fuels word of mouth but another uh
another another thing that fuels word of
mouth is the actual product because if
the product doesn't help you to achieve
your goals if it's not effective
people won't talk about it so at the end
it's a combination of everything but
yeah this is what we uh this is where we
spend the majority of our efforts we
didn't Focus too much on things like
advertising we didn't our paid
advertising budget was super low
historically and still super low we
didn't spend a lot of money uh on ads
right we didn't do any a b testing so we
didn't try to create landing pages and
figure out which landing page uh is
bringing us more leads uh we didn't we
didn't do any conversion optimization
for example if we know that a certain
article is generating lots of traffic we
didn't try to calculate how many leads
it gets and how to optimize this article
to maximize the list that we're getting
so we didn't focus on those things we
focused on
making our customers successful
and creating basically content that can
rank in Google and that can educate
people so that they would go and talk to
other people so I this is how I see our
growth engine
got it and what do you feel
it's a great point there you focused on
actually making excuse me your content
successful what do you feel
makes great SEO content Tim this is a
very broad question but nowadays like
there's so many people with their own
ideas on what formulates SEO content you
raise some good points there that many
companies will focus on this yeah I can
tell you what yeah sorry sorry to
interrupt I can tell you what definitely
doesn't make uh SEO content successful
and that is chat deputy
so we definitely want very very hot
topic right now
yeah yeah exactly so uh
for example right now in our marketing
department
I don't see an application for things
like chat GPT and we don't really use
any of those
AI kind of tools uh to help us create
content the way I see successful content
the content that stands out the content
that people would talk about the content
that would capture attention because
some people are throwing the term
attention economy and they do believe
that we are an attention economy who has
the most attention can monetize that
attention basically
and there is unique content if you can
say something unique if you can say
something that hasn't been said before
that gets attention uh and all those
tools like chat GPT and all those
optimization tools that kind of promise
you to create better content all they do
is they help you make the content that
is similar to existing content so for me
this is uh a wrong strategy you have to
create unique content that is not
similar to what's already there you have
to say something that hasn't been said
before and you to to say something that
hasn't been said before you oftentimes
need to do something first get
first-hand experience and then talk
about it in your content
so is that something that ahrefs kind of
has strive to to do in terms of putting
out unique information that's perhaps
not anywhere available else Elsewhere on
the internet
yeah we always try to
to work with our own data that we have
to produce interesting research and to
come up with interesting statistics for
example uh how long does it take to rank
in Google uh this is a common question
in the SEO industry and we decided that
we have enough data to analyze it
because we have these snapshots of
Google search results for millions of
keywords and we can go back in time and
see for the page that is ranking number
one right now when did it first appear
at position number 99 or something like
that and this way we were able to do a
small research study and answer the
question how long does it take to rank
in Google and that study was quite
successful when it was published it got
a lot of references from different
websites and a lot of people were using
our numbers that we got in this study as
uh kind of proof for their clients that
results May Vary depending on different
factors and we still feel do try to
create you need perform unique
experiments and try to study the data
that we have to to come up with
interesting insights or takeaways
that no one has done before and I think
this is very important if you want to be
successful at creating content
yeah it's great advice it's great advice
um now
in terms of when you start educating the
market
putting out this content
trying to be as unique as insightful as
you could with two main objectives kind
of ranking on search engines but also
growing through word of mouth was there
any ever any skepticism I.E this could
be very very good or it could be very
very bad as we're basically going all in
on organic content but we're not paying
any paid spend behind it was anyone the
organization ever like maybe we should
Chuck a load of cash at ads as well just
as a backup plan or maybe we should do
this other channel just as a backup plan
um or was always like we know this is
going to work because we've talked to
our customers we know this is the right
path
uh like I said we like to rely on things
like logic and Common Sense
and what does logic tell us logic tell
us that there is a lot of surge demand
in Google for things related to SEO how
to do keyword research how to build
links how to do SEO audit of my website
uh how to come up with better topics for
blog
etc etc etc there's tons of things that
people are searching in Google in
regards to SEO
and we can integrate our product while
answering those questions because our
product helps with a lot of SEO related
things
so
thinking logically if we are not
creating this content and if we are not
uh investing enough effort to make sure
that this content would rank at the top
then someone else would be ranking at
the top
and people would go to some other
website and learn about those things
from some other website and start using
some other tool that is promoted in
those articles
so whether or not
it works in the uh short time frame so
for example like half a year from now if
we start our content strategy would we
start getting traffic we don't know
but like in three years from now where
we want to be do we want to have lots of
content that answers those questions and
that is ranking high at Google and
brings us lots of consistent traffic
yeah we do so even in the short term we
won't be able to get a lot of leads or
sales from this strategy it still makes
made sense to do it to push on it
because we're here for the long run we
want to build a great company and we
want to invest in channels that make
sense yeah like and again uh one doesn't
exclude exclude the other so even if we
had
a budget that we want to spend on
acquiring paid traffic
why can't we work on our content
marketing and SEO at the same time so
one person is running ads another person
is writing articles I don't see a
problem white has to be one or the other
but logically it makes sense if people
search for something and you can be the
answer then you should be ranking hmm
got it so
looking at us look I've done a bit of
research before I chat and it looks like
between 2016 and 2020 your Revenue
scaled massively like it went from 16
mil to 88 mil
um was that just because you were
doubling down on this content strategy
and all of a sudden it was hitting a
peak of when you're really capturing
serious demand in the market or was
there something else that went on
internally that you think kind of spear
rocketed this growth
uh it's a combination of things of
course it's it's not we cannot attribute
uh that growth to one specific specific
thing so
oh we're going back to the same things
that I just uh discussed we continuously
improved our product and we made sure
that our product actually helps people
uh with their problems help helps them
uh save time save money uh or do some
things more effectively uh
we also created more and more
educational content so that people who
were interested to learn how to do
something essay related would come to us
and those two things a product that
helps people to be successful and
education that educates people how to
use our product to be successful it
fueled the word of mouth
and this just created a flywheel that
kept spinning and spinning and spinning
and the more content we created the more
features we were adding the more we sped
up
how the flywheel was uh moving
got it man and in terms of your
marketing department
so what are some tips that you'd advise
for anyone that's perhaps looking to to
build out their own marketing team what
would you say has worked well for
yourself Tim
uh probably the best advice I can give
is that
if you want
to delegate a certain tasks to someone
and make sure that it would be executed
flawlessly
find someone who is already executing
this task flawlessly somewhere else
because it is much much harder to Simply
hire some smart and capable person and
teach them to do something
as opposed to just notice a person who
is doing a great job on some at
something and hire them and say please
do the same thing but do it for us
uh yeah but those people are a few so
it's very hard to find those people and
it's very hard to persuade them to join
your team uh this is why things like
brand and this is why things like
building in public helps you because
people naturally want to come and work
by your side because they know what kind
of work you're doing and they want to
learn from you and they want to kind of
share some of your success
but still it's incredibly hard to uh to
get those kinds of people to it to your
team so the next advice I have is to
have
strong uh workflows and Sops standard
operating procedures
where you write down how a certain task
or a certain goal should be achieved uh
in very small details uh preferably if
you do it yourself if you do it yourself
for a while and figure out all the all
the shortcomings all the problems all
the uh
uh hidden issues and then you create a
proper sop which you can teach to
someone else and even if this person
leaves your team you can pass an sop to
another person and they would figure it
out figure it out and do it but still
it's not as effective as just finding
someone who already is successful at
something you need to be done and hiring
that person
yeah that's that's always the trouble
right convincing them then to come onto
your company yeah to work with your
brand but then I suppose if you've got
the brand reputation there that that
helps a lot
um we did have a question actually Tim I
put out that I was interviewing you we
had a question in from uh somebody Tunes
in they're asking how do you balance
brand
with demand growth
whilst trying to hit your Revenue
targets
uh I would love to uh ask a question to
this person uh what is brand and what is
demand growth and uh why does this
person thinks that those things don't
intersect so when you're working on your
demand growth you're working on your
brand and vice versa when you're working
on your brand you're working on demand
growth like what is brand as far as they
know is quite a tricky question uh
because for example when people go to
your support chat
and they talk to a human being from your
company
the way that this person is treating you
is your brand
but is this
the responsibility of marketing to
create
proper workflows and procedures for the
customer support team to make sure that
everything is on brand
so this gets tricky and this depends on
every organization and uh what kind of
responsibilities the heads of different
departments uh think are theirs and what
does uh CEO of that company thinks about
it so yeah it's a it's a very tricky
question it depends on on how every
specific organization sees
what is their brand and who is
responsible for it and what is demand
generation and who is responsible for it
so I don't have a more specific answer
to this question than that
I think you've covered it fairly well in
some of your earlier responses as well
when you've talked about the strategy
that ahrefs have taken with their
content as well because I think it it
does kind of play into that as well
um but Tim but on a bit of a tangent
here what do you feel uh we touched on a
bit earlier are some of the main
pointers that the companies that really
want to win an SEO in 2023
especially bearing mind SEO is getting
working more and more competitive unless
you we are in more of a fairly new
market that's perhaps got more demand
that you can capture that hasn't yet
been snapped up by competitors what do
you think of the things you've mentioned
stay clear of chat ubt but that that
aside what are some of the main things
that you should focus on for the
businesses that really want to win and
really want to capture the demand in
organic search
so uh SEO consists of generally three
things first is the content that you
create and if you make sure that you
create content around the things that
people are actually searching for uh
you're already doing good so that's the
first step step make sure you create
content about the things that people are
searching for I also touched upon the
importance of creating unique content
and not just taking the top 10 ranking
articles and rewriting it and hoping
that Google would favor your article
over the existing ones uh the second
thing is uh technical SEO it's kind of
fixing all the issues with your website
making sure it loads well making sure it
works in Mobile and stuff uh but then
again uh this is kind of responsibility
of the web development team as well
because usually uh SEO people don't
really code websites themselves they
just give advice to uh those who are
building those websites on how to make
them uh better in the eyes of Google and
the third thing is backlinks so you
might have amazing content the most
unique content the most original content
in the world and it can be about topics
that people are searching for and your
website can be technically sound it will
load fast everything would be good about
it Google will be able to crawl it but
if other websites are not linking to you
and not validating that what you're
talking about on your website is
important and this is what they do when
they link to you uh Google will not know
that whatever you have on your website
is important so you get you need to get
links from other websites websites
but one thing I didn't see people in the
SEO space
talk about enough
is that
by actually improving your business by
actually improving your product
and making sure that your product has
value to people that people are I know
more successful happier and blah blah
blah by using your product
you're actually generating
uh attention and demand and notoriety so
people might start linking to you just
because of your product just because you
make a better product than everyone else
or a more unique product than ever
everyone else and links are links if you
get enough links thanks to your product
your content will flourish because it
your content doesn't necessarily need to
get links like directly
if your website is important if it gets
a lot of links thanks to the product
then your content will automatically be
Authority because this content is
creating is created by someone who
created an amazing product and this is
something that I saw uh from time to
time in the comments to some of our
articles videos and tweets uh when we
talk about link building people were
saying but your ahrefs lots of people
are linking to you because you have this
product blah blah blah but that's the
point
because we have this great product that
lots of people in the space appreciate
and link to our content automatically
gains credibility of the product so it
makes sense that our content would
automatically rank better so for people
who are looking to be more successful at
SEO uh
I can advise to keep focusing on their
business keep making sure that their
business is better than any alternatives
keep pushing the boundaries further keep
innovating uh because this brings
notoriety this brings mentions and links
from other websites and then when you
create content you're already an
authority so this content would
automatically rank better in Google of
course I'm oversimplifying things a
little bit but essentially this is how
it works and this is how it worked for
each apps specifically
yeah yeah it's it's some great points
and I think that's something that's not
really thought about them enough
especially like you say when it comes to
link building actually having a great
offer having a great product having a
great service
and when you are which links back to
pretty much everything we've talked
about in this conversation with the
content flywheel that if you have got
that great offer if you have built up
that brand if you have educated the
market if you are showing top of organic
search results when people are having
questions around your offer then you are
going to be that brand so when people
are creating content that might have
some relevance to you chances are
they're considering you to give you a
link to direct to you whatever that may
be so that's that's a really point that
I a really good point that I feel is
probably lesser known when it comes to
actually ramping up your SEO strategy so
yeah I like that one so Tim just before
we wrap things up what's the what's the
focus for ah rest for for the next year
or so moving forward I know you guys
have got the yep search engine working
on in in the background but what are
some of the the main focuses is it all
in on that is it still keep the content
flyable spinning or any new ideas in the
mixer
uh yeah definitely we'll keep doing what
worked for us historically we'll keep
working on great educational content uh
do some interesting experiments uh do
some interesting studies uh but now as
our content marketing team is more
mature and the processes are more
streamlined uh we can do some more
interesting stuff uh the so-called more
Creative Marketing again with the goal
of capturing attention uh but not
necessarily on search engines but maybe
on social platforms like Twitter
Facebook uh Etc so I cannot really make
any spoilers of the actual projects that
we are going to announce this year but
there are a few projects that I'm super
excited about and I'm sure they are
nothing like what people in our space
have seen before so I'm very excited
about launching those kind of creative
uh campaigns and see how our industry
would react to that
good man Tim I really enjoyed the
conversation thanks for for sharing the
some of the ahref story insights and uh
yeah coming on the show man so I
appreciate that so with that said please
do tell us more about how everyone
tuning in can connect with you learn
more about ahrefs and anything you'd
like to share with our audience
uh thanks a lot for having me yeah I'm
I'm most active on Twitter this is where
I'm sharing some bits of knowledge that
I gained while working at ahrefs uh and
yeah if anyone is interested uh to give
a spin to ahrefs uh I first recommend to
find our YouTube channel to go to
YouTube Type in a h r e f s and you'll
find plenty of cool videos which show
how to achieve different things with
ahrefs and this will give you an idea of
what you can do with our product and if
you need it or not uh at this stage of
your you know online marketing or online
business Journey so that's about it
nice one Tim thanks once again man
enjoyed the chat
thank you
cheers and as always if you enjoyed
today's episode a quick rating or review
on your podcast channels appreciated or
if you're tuning on YouTube a quick
subscribe goes a long way and with that
we'll catch you on the next one for more
actionable B2B marketing advice to grow
your business and grow your Revenue
thank you very much for tuning in